[Page 1]
Natural Language 
Processing 
Applications
Information Extraction
Sentiment Analysis & Subjectivity


[Page 2]
Outlines
• Information Extraction (IE) 
• Sentiment Analysis (SA) and Subjectivity
Mariam Fakih 2

[Page 3]
Information Extraction (IE) 
• Information extraction (IE) is the process of scanning text 
for information relevant to some interest, including 
extracting entities, relations, and, most challenging, 
events—or who did what to whom, when, and where. 
• It requires deeper analysis than keyword searches, but its 
aims fall short of the very hard and long-term problem of 
text understanding, where we seek to capture all the 
information in a text, along with the speaker’s or writer’s 
intention. 
• IE represents a midpoint on this spectrum, where the aim is 
to capture structured information without sacrificing 
feasibility.
Mariam Fakih 3

[Page 4]
Information Extraction (IE) 
• IE typically focuses on surface linguistic phenomena
that do not require deep inference, and it focuses on the 
phenomena that are most frequent in texts.
• IE technology arose in response to the need for efficient 
processing of texts in specialized domains.
• IE technology focuses on only the relevant parts of the 
text and ignores the rest.
Mariam Fakih 4

[Page 5]
Information Extraction (IE) 
• Typical applications of IE systems are :
• gleaning business, 
• government, 
• or military intelligence from a large number of sources; 
• in searches of the World Wide Web for more specific 
information than keywords can discriminate; 
• for scientific literature searches; 
• in building databases from large textual corpora; 
• and in the curation of biomedical articles. 
Mariam Fakih 5

[Page 6]
Information Extraction (IE) 
• Named entity recognition (NER) is one of the most 
common uses of IE technology.
• NER is especially important in biomedical applications, 
where terminology is a formidable problem.
• NER systems identify different types of proper names, 
• such as person and company names, 
• and sometimes special types of entities, such as dates 
and times, that can be easily identified using surface 
level textual patterns.
Mariam Fakih 6

[Page 7]
Information Extraction (IE) 
• For example, in each of the sentences
“Microsoft acquired Powerset.”
“Powerset was acquired by Microsoft.”
• we would like to recognize not only that Microsoft and 
Powerset are company names, but also that an acquisition 
event took place, that the acquiring company was 
Microsoft, and the acquired company was Powerset.
Mariam Fakih 7

[Page 8]
Information Extraction (IE) 
• Much of the technology in IE was developed in response to 
a series of evaluations and associated conferences called the 
Message Understanding Conference (MUC).
• Except for the earliest MUCs, these evaluations were based 
on a corpus of domain-specific texts, such as news articles 
on joint ventures.
• IE research has since been stimulated by the Automatic 
Content Extraction (ACE) evaluations. 
• The ACE evaluations have focused on 
• identifying named entities,
• extracting isolated relations,
• and coreference resolution.
Mariam Fakih 8

[Page 9]
Information Extraction (IE) 
• In a typical IE system, there are five levels of processing:
1. Complex Words: This includes the recognition of 
multiwords and proper name entities, such as people, 
companies, and countries.
2. Basic Phrases: Sentences are segmented into noun 
groups, verb   groups, and particles.
3. Complex Phrases: Complex noun groups and complex 
verb groups are identified.
Mariam Fakih 9

[Page 10]
Information Extraction (IE) 
4. Domain Events: The sequence of phrases produced at 
Level 3 is scanned for patterns of interest to the application, 
and when they are found, semantic structures are built that 
encode the information about entities and events contained in 
the pattern.
5. Merging Structures: Semantic structures from different 
parts of the text are merged if they provide information about 
the same entity or event. 
This process is sometimes called template generation, and is a 
complex process not done by a finite-state transducer.
Mariam Fakih 10

[Page 11]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
• Textual information in the world can be broadly 
categorized into two main types: 
❑ facts and 
❑ opinions.
• Facts are objective expressions about entities, events, 
and their properties. 
• Opinions are usually subjective expressions that describe 
people’s sentiments, appraisals, or feelings toward 
entities, events, and their properties. 
• Much of the existing research on textual information 
processing has been focused on the mining and 
retrieval of factual information, e.g., information 
retrieval (IR), Web search, text classification, text 
clustering, and many other text mining and natural 
language processing tasks. Mariam Fakih 11

[Page 12]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
• Little work had been done on the processing of opinions
until only recently. 
• Yet, opinions are so important that whenever we need to 
make a decision we want to hear others’ opinions. 
• This is not only true for individuals but also true for 
organizations.
• One of the main reasons for the lack of study on opinions 
is the fact that there was little opinionated text available 
before the World Wide Web. 
Mariam Fakih 12

[Page 13]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
• Before the Web, when an individual needed to make a 
decision, he or she typically asked for opinions from 
friends and families. 
• When an organization wanted to find the opinions or 
sentiments of the general public about its products and 
services, it conducted opinion polls, surveys, and focus 
groups. 
• However, with the Web, especially with the explosive 
growth of the user-generated content on the Web in the 
past few years, the world has been transformed.
• The Web has dramatically changed the way that people 
express their views and opinions. Mariam Fakih 13

[Page 14]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
• They can now post reviews of products at merchant sites 
and express their views on almost anything in Internet 
forums, discussion groups, and blogs, which are 
collectively called the user-generated content. 
• This online word-of-mouth behavior represents new and 
measurable sources of information with many practical 
applications. 
• Now if one wants to buy a product, he or she is no longer 
limited to asking his or her friends and families because 
there are many product reviews on the Web that give 
opinions of existing users of the product. Mariam Fakih 14

[Page 15]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
• However, finding opinion sources and monitoring them 
on the Web can still be a formidable task because there 
are a large number of diverse sources, and each source 
may also have a huge volume of opinionated text (text 
with opinions or sentiments).
• In many cases, opinions are hidden in long forum posts 
and blogs.
• It is difficult for a human reader to find relevant sources, 
extract related sentences with opinions, read them, 
summarize them, and organize them into usable forms. 
Mariam Fakih 15

[Page 16]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
• Thus, automated opinion discovery and summarization 
systems are needed. 
• Sentiment analysis, also known as opinion mining, 
grows out of this need.
• It is a challenging natural language processing or text-
mining problem.
• Due to its tremendous value for practical applications, 
there has been an explosive growth of both research in 
academia and applications in the industry. 
• There are now at least 20–30 companies that offer 
sentiment analysis services in the United States alone. Mariam Fakih 16

[Page 17]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
This research field, focuses on the following topics:
• The problem of sentiment analysis
• Sentiment and subjectivity classification
• Feature-based sentiment analysis
• Sentiment analysis of comparative sentences
• Opinion search and retrieval
• Opinion spam and utility of opinions
Mariam Fakih 17

[Page 18]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
• The problem of sentiment analysis: As for any scientific 
problem, before solving it we need to define or to formalize 
the problem. 
➢ The formulation will introduce the basic definitions, core 
concepts and issues, subproblems, and target objectives. 
➢ It also serves as a common framework to unify different 
research directions. 
➢ From an application point of view, it tells practitioners 
what the main tasks are, their inputs and outputs, and 
how the resulting outputs may be used in practice
Mariam Fakih 18

[Page 19]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
• Sentiment and subjectivity classification: It treats 
sentiment analysis as a text classification problem. 
• Two subtopics that have been extensively studied are: 
➢ (1) classifying an opinionated document as expressing a 
positive or negative opinion, 
➢ (2) classifying a sentence or a clause of the sentence as 
subjective or objective, and for a subjective sentence or 
clause classifying it as expressing a positive, negative,
or neutral opinion. 
Mariam Fakih 19

[Page 20]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
• The first topic, commonly known as sentiment 
classification or document-level sentiment classification, 
aims to find the general sentiment of the author in an 
opinionated text. 
For example, given a product review, it determines 
whether the reviewer is positive or negative about the 
product.
• The second topic goes to individual sentences to 
determine whether a sentence expresses an opinion or not 
(often called subjectivity classification), and if so, 
whether the opinion is positive or negative (called 
sentence-level sentiment classification) Mariam Fakih 20

[Page 21]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
• Feature-based sentiment analysis: This model first 
discovers the targets on which opinions have been 
expressed in a sentence, and then determines whether the 
opinions are positive, negative, or neutral. 
➢ The targets are objects, and their components, attributes 
and features. 
➢ An object can be a product, service, individual, 
organization, event, topic, etc. 
➢ For instance, in a product review sentence, it identifies 
product features that have been commented on by the 
reviewer and determines whether the comments are 
positive or negative.
For example, in the sentence, “The battery life of this 
Mariam Fakih 21

[Page 22]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
• Sentiment analysis of comparative sentences: The 
evaluation of an object can be done in two main ways, 
direct appraisal and comparison. 
➢ Direct appraisal, called direct opinion, gives positive or 
negative opinions about the object without mentioning 
any other similar objects. 
➢ Comparison means to compare the object with some 
other similar objects (e.g., competing products). 
Mariam Fakih 22

[Page 23]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
➢ For example, “The picture quality of this camera is poor,” 
expresses a direct opinion, while “The picture quality of 
Camera-x is better than that of Camera-y.” expresses a 
comparison. 
➢ Clearly, it is useful to identify such sentences, extract 
comparative opinions expressed in them, and determine 
which objects are preferred by the sentence authors.
Mariam Fakih 23

[Page 24]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
• Opinion search and retrieval: Since the general Web search 
has been so successful in many aspects, it is not hard to 
imagine that opinion search will be very useful as well. 
➢ one wants to find positive and negative opinions on the issue 
from an opinion search engine.
➢ For such a query, two tasks need to be performed: 
(1) retrieving documents or sentences that are 
relevant to the query, and 
(2) identifying and ranking opinionated documents or 
sentences from those retrieved. 
➢ Opinion search is thus a combination of IR and sentiment 
analysis.
Mariam Fakih 24

[Page 25]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
• Opinion spam and utility of opinions: As opinions on the Web 
are important for many applications, it is no surprise that people 
have started to game the system
➢ Opinion spam refers to fake or bogus opinions that try to 
deliberately mislead readers or automated systems by giving 
undeserving positive opinions to some target objects in order to 
promote the objects and/or by giving malicious negative 
opinions to some other objects in order to damage their 
reputations. 
Mariam Fakih 25

[Page 26]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
➢ Detecting such spam is very important for applications. The 
utility of opinions refers to the usefulness or quality of 
opinions. 
➢ Automatically assigning utility values to opinions is useful as 
opinions can then be ranked based on their utility values.
➢ With the ranking, the reader can focus on those quality 
opinions. We should note, however, that spam and utility are 
different concepts.
Mariam Fakih 26

[Page 27]
Sentiment Analysis (SA) and 
Subjectivity
• Finally, we conclude the chapter by saying that all the sentiment 
analysis tasks are very challenging.
• Our understanding and knowledge of the problem and its solution 
are still very limited. 
• The main reason is that it is a natural language processing task, and 
natural language processing has no easy problems.
• Another reason may be due to our popular ways of doing research. 
We probably relied too much on machine learning algorithms. 
• Some of the most effective machine learning algorithms, produce 
no human understandable results such that although they may 
achieve improved accuracy, 
• These practical needs and the technical challenges will keep the 
field vibrant and lively for years to come. Mariam Fakih 27